# xtal
Miniaiture Crystal Radio, this is project doument and create the smallest crystal radio.

Radio is more than a century old in any way we are still just getting to know it better because of that time domain restraints, so what would have a radio inventor done differently more than a century ago with some of the tools we have today? 
 Spark gap transimtters are not active like crystal radio, a good reason for it's persistsnce is the simplicity of ther radio circuit and building parts which arte not common in most electronic stockists but you can make do with the current suppliers online. 
A drawback is the requirement of a large antenna(this is a current research topic at the IOP among many others), ofcourse there are a number of ways a electronics designer can approach this including making a integrated ciruit design on for a System on Chips for complex maybe novel or trivial pursposes because we also have software radio to consider, as long as there's the right design it possible to mix analogue computing and digital computing with dedicated devices for specific results in mixed signal environments. 

Some reference Text at the end of the file for the sake of reading. This is by no means a rundown on a bare bones radio that already works as long as you have a signal to tune into, it's as bare bones as the circuits, diagrams you will run into.

Some reference Text at the end of the file for the sake of reading. This is by no means a rundown on a bare bones radio that already works as long as you have a signal to tune into, it's as bare bones as the circuits, diagrams you will run into.
Basically there have been various examples of tiny radio circuits the most recent that still holds the smallest example of a radio receiver is the Harvard "atomic radio" example demonstrated here from December 2016 if you are still in the in a mistletoe mode in January 2024, it's not strictly speaking a crystal variant but more of a laser powered device exciting two atoms with a spin in a certain direction that can be manipulated to demodulate radio waves magnetically with a single photon(this implies modulation is possible), for selective excitation of electronic spins in a diamond" of a certain kind, remember how CDs/DVDs spin but lasers today have complimentary materials spin that corresponds to the pattern of light from the laser or vice versa(we haven't made optical memory chips yet).
Ofcourse you need less distortion that demonstrated in the Harvard device and should expect improvements that you can pay for by way of knowledge for a specific purposes not just the active wording of applications or use cases such as a scaled up version using nano particles also possibly nano tubes, scaling at a macro level.

Scale through chips is noticeable for memory but you don't have a everyday application that you do some math except for the number of bits or bytes you have to accommodate because you have to wait online or otherwise for bandwidth on any channel type, of device, you are rarely thinking about CPU frequencies and resonance with other devices in a one way hardware dialogue that still needs breaking of basic fundamental limits in every aspect to achieve something new in design briefs especially for chips. Optical memory for RAM or ROM application is still a holy grail yet to be achieved for everyday semiconductor electronics, to process all the bandwidth, content, data or information around anyone now especially at the speed of a keyboard, touchscreen or voice gestures there's a need to absorb and move data, but see how a simple device can do all that at a glance but you can only tune into a single thing at a time.
Modern devices are made to multitask and the more sources they have the smoother the experience especially when a device does not have to perform a CPU operation to achieve anything, such as a button press or less, background listening which is usually delegated to a dedicated chip for a file or a radio stream analogue or digital for user controls. So the analogue computing's cue for repetitive or sustainably scaling operations that can be done on a analogue computer just as math processors did until they became a mainstream feature along with GPUs which were solely for architects, designers, gamers and modellers but are now the main driving force for AI models, natural language processing and stream computing. It's really hybrid computing but the only thing missing is the components for optical components. just operating at different wavelengths in the light spectrum and you can consider meta-materials already in use for structural purposes in devices. It's important to see how this can work out in a computing cluster small scale boxes, grid scale compute blocks to shipping containers.

Other small radio examples include ICs(SoC hint) but none of them like block diagrams are ever complete, neither are they every day objects, so it is only natural to ask yourself why crystal radios ever look complete, because, that's academic. A unnatural reaction to a mind that has many firing synapses with it's dedicated neurons we have answers we have not consciously explored. Until you look at other circuits from different time periods and locations on the earth's grid you will gather that certain circuits are constructed and wired differently in different scenarios even if they come with a circuit diagram following different paths because they are period pieces from different age, but still a radio age with laser in the spectrum following up the spectrum chase. We use light emitting diodes everyday now for even for recreation of daylight or filament color lighting with LEDs also for moving data with LiFi apart from closed loop fiber maybe free space optics(point to point optical links without the cable) for people who were early adopters(IrDA still in some working hardware)especially nineties computers which had magneto optical disc drives such as Mini disc transport, modern discs are a main application for laser light in the spectrum remember optical discs(CD/DVD format) have pits in them.

It is possible to say that crystal radio is EMP or nuclear proof(not the nuclear blast obviously like most things) dependent on construction like thermionic valves or nixie tubes like the dull colored light bulb shaped devices in some amps or Cathode Ray 'Tube' televisions. Of course it's much simpler than a RADAR station or a 90s TV because said crystal radio circuit does not need power unless you have to add a amp among other things.
You can connect it to a computer and produce some interesting results apart from just expecting the DSP to do all the magic as you do with a typical IF or IQ SDR output from whatever configuration your receiver hardware supports. The main thing is that it works as long as you have a imagination for it to do so, usually many just give up on hardware that's perfectly working and needs a few modifications to do a few more tricks. 

For alack of a better performance before being stuck with a choice, you can stick a block diagram in to the mix to get the best results possible with minimum fuss as in effort, parts and labor over man hours before you become too academic about it all such as looking it up in a text book when it already a memory embedded by curiosity that needs a little pep that only imagination can afford. To think of  crystal radio as a analogue computer is a curious thought, it does another thing with minimal input no pun intended on the number of signals but it does process radio wave into lesser but humanly useful audio energy with the specific components required maybe a mere handful to less or more depending on how far one wants to go or how pedantic the circuitry design is it is more accurate than typcial analogue computing techniques because a dial is useful but if you know what you are looking for with the right wavelengths, the results are reproducible at least for your ears!

A question(s) is how to adopt the components for different electro magnetic wavelengths of the spectrum especially for a optical compute proof of concept not just the obvious quantum computing capability. The idea is to address current limits in Moore's law on Von Neumann Computer architecture, especially simultaneous(async/synchronous) throughput and hybrid applications electrical/optical hardware on current motherboards(this is only possible for data transfer, like memory it is perfectly scalable). See how you pick that apart as any engineer should in theory and practice.

Topics: Analogue, Digital, DSP, FPGA/ASIC, HPC, Hybrid, Optical and Stream computing, Analogue & Digital Radio 

Description of a miniature electrical dipole, Institute of Physics White paper https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1674-1056/ac6495/meta

Crystal Radio Wiki https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crystal_radio 
1958 Sample Miniature Cat's whisker(Crystal Radio) https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vintage_Bronson_Miniature_Crystal_Radio,_Made_By_Bronson_Products_Company,_Chicago_Illinois,_Circa_1958_(48608258913).jpg 

Atomic scale radio, A diamond radio receiver video and article - YouTube.com/watch?v=aytf0Jk8YJ4 https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2016/12/the-worlds-tiniest-radio/
"In the Harvard device, electrons in diamond NV centers are powered, or pumped, by green light emitted from a laser. These electrons are sensitive to electromagnetic fields, including the waves used in FM radio. When NV center receives radio waves. It converts them and emits the audio signal as red light. A common photodiode converts that light into a current, which is then converted to sound through a simple speaker or headphone.

An electromagnet creates a strong magnetic field around the diamond, which can be used to change the radio station, tuning the receiving frequency of the NV centers." NV(Nitrogen Vacancy).

LiFi WikiPedia Summary https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Li-Fi LiFi Github Topic https://github.com/topics/lifi LiFi FAQ https://www.purelifi.com/faq/
LiFi IEEE Standard 2023 at 9.6Gbps https://spectrum.ieee.org/lifi-standards https://spectrum.ieee.org/li-fi-better-than-wi-fi
