# xtal
Miniature Crystal Radio, this is project document and create the smallest crystal radio with common tools or or lab alternatives. An1d illustrate less from more.

Radio is more than a century old in any way we are still just getting to know it better because of that time domain restraints, so what would have a radio inventor done differently more than a century ago with some of the tools we have today? 
Rewiring and reconfiguring a circuit using any processing power or ability should be as easy as making a new drawing, it's also necessary to have all this at the first page or top of the page of any design tool.  
 Spark gap transmitters are not active like crystal radio, a good reason for it's persistence is the simplicity of the radio circuit and building parts which arte not common in most electronic stockists but you can make do with the current suppliers online. 
So we have all manner and type of design opportunities, like any opportunity it has to be missed to be seen in order to be made into a design brief. It is possible to see people dumping electronic gear and radio stats can be deceiving because of that little wasteful fact alone, there's more trash in orbit than service recycling included - all this trash should be included on NASA's Planetary Data System under near earth space weather, the circular economy is yet to reach orbit so expect more trash on the moon and mars soon. The common thought is that there is not enough power to deal with real world problems(don't forget to laugh), even though some smartphones are more powerful than some super computers from a very few decades ago. Just because people are looking at their phones doesn't mean they are changing the way they are looking at things because devices have to fit into a set of daily habits, routines or what you want to do in your time(calendar checkbox, check) there has to be the physical content were people usually allow all types of weather or other mass event natural phenomena to take over in advance, it is possible to "mitigate" most known events because we are so keen to prove that we are smarter than dinosaurs. So feel free to think clearly and freely.

Radio really needs to be as simple as a few lego kit for anyone to relate to what's going on inside and around them, radio is that simple.
Some reference text at the end of the file for the sake of reading. This is by no means a rundown on a bare bones radio that already works as long as you have a signal to tune into, it's as bare bones as the circuits, diagrams you will run into. Also it's not a shakedown of all the unpublished innovations derived from this passive self powered device.

A drawback is the requirement of a large antenna(this is a current research topic at the IOP among many others), ofcourse there are a number of ways a electronics designer can approach this including making a integrated circuit design on for a System on Chips for complex maybe novel or trivial purposes because we also have software radio to consider, as long as there's the right design it possible to mix analogue computing and digital computing with dedicated devices for specific results in mixed signal environments. 

Basically there have been various examples of tiny radio circuits the most recent that still holds the smallest example of a radio receiver is the Harvard "atomic radio" example demonstrated here from December 2016 if you are still in the in a mistletoe mode in January 2024, it's not strictly speaking a crystal variant but more of a laser powered device exciting two atoms with a spin in a certain direction that can be manipulated to demodulate radio waves magnetically with a single photon(this implies modulation is possible), for selective excitation of electronic spins in a diamond" of a certain kind, remember how CDs/DVDs spin but lasers today have complimentary materials spin that corresponds to the pattern of light from the laser or vice versa(we haven't made optical memory chips yet).
Ofcourse you need less distortion that demonstrated in the Harvard device and should expect improvements that you can pay for by way of knowledge for a specific purposes not just the active wording of applications or use cases such as a scaled up version using nano particles also possibly nano tubes(rods), scaling at a macro level.

Scale through chips is noticeable for memory but you don't have a everyday application that you do some math except for the number of bits or bytes you have to accommodate because you have to wait online or otherwise for bandwidth on any channel type, of device, you are rarely thinking about CPU frequencies and resonance with other devices in a one way hardware dialogue that still needs breaking of basic fundamental limits in every aspect to achieve something new in design briefs especially for chips(there's a lot of one way traffic online). Optical memory for RAM or ROM application is still a holy grail yet to be achieved for everyday semiconductor electronics, to process all the bandwidth, content, data or information around anyone now especially at the speed of a keyboard, touchscreen or voice gestures there's a need to absorb and move data, but see how a simple device can do all that at a glance but you can only tune into a single thing at a time.
Modern devices are made to multitask and the more sources they have the smoother the better the experience they offer especially when a device does not have to perform a CPU operation to achieve anything, such as a button press or less, background listening which is usually delegated to a dedicated chip for a file or a radio stream analogue or digital for user controls. So the analogue computing's cue for repetitive or sustainably scaling operations that can be done on a analogue computer just as math processors did until they became a mainstream feature along with GPUs which were solely for architects, designers, gamers and modelers but are now the main driving force for AI models, natural language processing and stream computing. It's really hybrid computing but the only thing missing is the components for optical components. just operating at different wavelengths in the light spectrum and you can consider meta-materials already in use for structural purposes in devices. It's important to see how this can work out in a computing cluster small scale boxes, grid scale compute blocks to shipping containers.

Other small radio examples include ICs(SoC hint) but none of them like block diagrams are ever complete, neither are they every day objects, so it is only natural to ask yourself why crystal radios ever look complete, because, that's academic. A unnatural reaction to a mind that has many firing synapses with it's dedicated neurons we have answers we have not consciously explored. Until you look at other circuits from different time periods and locations on the earth's grid you will gather that certain circuits are constructed and wired differently in different scenarios even if they come with a circuit diagram following different paths because they are period pieces from different age, but still a radio age with laser in the spectrum following up the spectrum chase. We use light emitting diodes everyday now for even for recreation of daylight or filament color lighting with LEDs also for moving data with LiFi apart from closed loop fiber maybe free space optics(point to point optical links without the cable) for people who were early adopters(IrDA still in some working hardware)especially nineties computers which had magneto optical disc drives such as Mini disc transport, modern discs are a main application for laser light in the spectrum remember optical discs(CD/DVD format) have pits in them. We already have limited devices expected do everything under the sun - they just have a limited scope because they are not very spectrum efficient and versatile on the receive end.

It is possible to say that crystal radio is EMP or nuclear proof(not the nuclear blast obviously like most things) dependent on construction like thermionic valves or nixie tubes like the dull colored light bulb shaped devices in some amps or Cathode Ray 'Tube' televisions. Of course it's much simpler than a RADAR station or a 90s TV because said crystal radio circuit does not need power unless you have to add a amp among other things.
You can connect it to a computer and produce some interesting results apart from just expecting the DSP to do all the magic as you do with a typical IF or IQ SDR output from whatever configuration your receiver hardware supports. The main thing is that it works as long as you have a imagination for it to do so, usually many just give up on hardware that's perfectly working and needs a few modifications to do a few more tricks. Basically add a few blocks and see what happens.

For alack of a better performance before being stuck with a choice, you can stick a block diagram in to the mix to get the best results possible with minimum fuss as in effort, parts and labor over man hours before you become too academic about it all such as looking it up in a text book when it already a memory embedded by curiosity that needs a little pep that only imagination can afford. To think of  crystal radio as a analogue computer is a curious thought, it does another thing with minimal input no pun intended on the number of signals but it does process radio wave into lesser but humanly useful audio energy with the specific components required maybe a mere handful to less or more depending on how far one wants to go or how pedantic the circuitry design is it is more accurate than typical analogue computing techniques because a dial is useful but if you know what you are looking for with the right wavelengths, the results are reproducible at least for your ears!

Touch screens are not so articulate because it's about mimicking a handheld at the expense of a full sized device's physical real estate, you know the menu interface, there are several devices that have ditched this by default or are just continuing the sole purpose of form and function rather than distraction, there's a level of confidence when you have something that works in most situations without regular button action. All these are turn offs especially when other devices have to be slaved to rely on a mobile device you already have to do a more than a dozen things with already, if you are a minimalist it's a splendid concept except for the cabling issues in niche setups. A crystal radio can only pickup the strongest signals for instance but so does anything else called a radio. In travel people will turn on their radio just like a cell phone as long as there's coverage 5G or SMS via satellite has a very long way to go, it is better to have all forms of radio service while they last(like a battery) even if it's just a internet or hyperlocal service(very limited city/town). It is possible to create a block diagram for a mobile device but it's only easier to add more design tweaks as value add ons that you have.

In theory having optical networking is enough for some, but the reality is obviously wanting because we can detect laziness(bottlenecks, latency - slow pings), slack or just something simple as least desirable performance during a computer operation which today means apps begging for some CPU time when all they to do is transfer data and act as if they are some kind of server which you have to fiddle a touch screen while the space heating keeps scaling with pure electric semiconductor/copper compute cores, optoelectronic compute cores will lower carbon footprints, energy consumption sustainably rather than just thermal problems.
Positive results require big problems need big time and longer attention spans for real visibility.

A question(s) is how to adopt the components for different electromagnetic wavelengths of the spectrum especially for a optical compute proof of concept not just the obvious quantum computing capability. The idea is to address current limits in Moore's law on Von Neumann Computer architecture, especially simultaneous(async/synchronous) throughput and hybrid applications electrical/optical hardware on current motherboards(this is only possible for data transfer, like memory it is perfectly scalable). See how you pick that apart as any engineer should in theory and practice.

Topics: 
Analogue, Digital, Computer Architecture & Engineering, Computer Models, 
DSP, FPGA/ASIC, HPC, Hybrid, Optical and Stream computing, Analogue & Digital Radio, 
Fiber applications with meta materials for power over fiber, RF over Fiber to begin with(as in proposed 6G/7G wireless standard iterations, interesting to see what futurists can usefully speculate for 10G wireless apart from what some might expect to be obvious engineering milestones to achieve on that route, it will be useful to visualise and map it until it happens).

Secondary Topics: 
3D Printing, AI, Additive Manufacturing, EDA, Engineering Continuum, Generative Coding(JVM, VHDL, Assembler, C), Multi Physics, Technical Documentation & Modeling, 
Graph Algorithms, Graph Models, Linked Data, Linked Open Data, LLMs, Optics, Optoelectronics, Semantic Web, Software Defined Networking, Software Defined Radio, Wireless Charging, Wireless Power(6G)

Description of a miniature electrical dipole, Institute of Physics White paper(FYI, a brief reading not a citation) https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1674-1056/ac6495/meta
See IEEE Press, IOP member texts for complimentary texts on materials science.  
 
Crystal Radio Wiki and external links https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crystal_radio
1958 Sample Miniature Cat's whisker(Crystal Radio) https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vintage_Bronson_Miniature_Crystal_Radio,_Made_By_Bronson_Products_Company,_Chicago_Illinois,_Circa_1958_(48608258913).jpg 

Atomic scale radio, A diamond radio receiver video and article - https://youtube.com/watch?v=aytf0Jk8YJ4 https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2016/12/the-worlds-tiniest-radio/
"In the Harvard device, electrons in diamond NV centers are powered, or pumped, by green light emitted from a laser. These electrons are sensitive to electromagnetic fields, including the waves used in FM radio. When NV center receives radio waves. It converts them and emits the audio signal as red light. A common photodiode converts that light into a current, which is then converted to sound through a simple speaker or headphone.

An electromagnet creates a strong magnetic field around the diamond, which can be used to change the radio station, tuning the receiving frequency of the NV centers." NV(Nitrogen Vacancy).

LiFi (IEEE 802 11bb) WikiPedia Summary https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Li-Fi LiFi Github Topic https://github.com/topics/lifi LiFi FAQ https://www.purelifi.com/faq/
LiFi IEEE Standard 2023 at 9.6Gbps https://spectrum.ieee.org/lifi-standards https://spectrum.ieee.org/li-fi-better-than-wi-fi

Why talk about cable standards, like lego blocks they connect everything - it's possible to minimise cabling with wireless charging/power for newer devices, efficient devices in hostile environments containing high levels of unshielded and end user initiated consumption of spectrum resources, the number of devices per person per grid square on a map has to be considered especially from first person experience with devices in a room/block. So we can talk about Micro QSFP(µQSFP), a interface for newer Ethernet connectors that support Power over Ethernet simultaneously with metal cable and optical cable that is thermally stable, so scalable from USB-A it is a overkill in it's purest form but it can be scaled down to make it possible to support USB-Ethernet for instance with new boards/chips for smarter cable outlays. The idea is simple replace the insulator plastic with a optical media terminator to do both.
What is MicroQSFP http://fowiki.com/b/introduction-to-%CE%BCqsfp-transceiver/
Visualise other USB possiblities https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB
You can compare using an existing connector in your hands. It's better to have fiberlike speeds so that audiophiles, radio amateurs or pros can scale out new products in their setups with direct onboard functions that are not limited to the setup of too many cables(Multi session PoE, PoF, RFoF content over fiber and so on).

"µQSFP, also known as MicroQSFP, is a high-speed IO interface system that connects server, storage, switch, video, and communication systems. It supports both copper and optical cabling and has improved thermal performance." https://www.connectortips.com/microqsfp-cage-connectors-modules-and-cable-are-being-launched-this-week/
    
Apart from EMC product shielding against strategies it is possible to shrink USB cables to USB-Fiber/Ethernet/P2P networking or scale up for hybrid operation to achieve more from less (space and time) with PoF, RFoF as we break into future generations of Ethernet standards, this is a possible route to scale µQSFP connections in the scheme of QSFP down to an SFP size while the QSFP-DD doubles lane count and so on while supporting better human user focused ergonomics. From µQSFP connections you can replace the pure plastic USB component into a active/passive µQSFP connection into host hardware or cable bundles that can support existing or new fiber standards with network media converter kits.

Ethernet Roadmap Graphic http://www.ethernetalliance.org/

Less is more especially in consumer devices that have the core microelectronics because it is necessary to get more from less and vice versa without a high cable count, component count, the higher the function to component ratio the better because they are still moving parts that have to be physically moved to a plant from a IC fabrication in someone's hands even if it's additive manufacturing in the process, so lessening the energy or carbon footprint to offer a direct interface to making the next generation of connectivity in the "consumer's face" just for fun to begin with(gaming, mobile, micro HPC clusters) is a start because we need to spend less time for storage and peripherals to make transfers to make more time for ourselves. 
So the next best thing is LiFi but all standards may share common development or test beds, on the face of things all them look mutually exclusive as finished products, that's what it just looks like but convergence, hybrid means more minimal footprints for products that do more with smaller footprints. The possibilities are endless, going forward the applications are really finite. Making them very feasible product engineering materials, looking forward to 6G and 7G wireless standards as the spectrum creep follows, it is absolutely necessary to exploit every mile, meter at any scale to see that through from the longest wavelengths to the visible or invisible spectra so that the first inch of the last mile can be covered. 
In, a home or office still needs better alternatives because it's now not uncommon to have over use of a handheld device in a fixed setting to compliment a listening or viewing session for a device that has enough resources to playback media of all things, this means certain components or content are missing across the board, it's not just the signal but the image of it that most people are turned of by. All these are turn offs.
Better design can make up for useful rights to repair in the face of after market modifications we know people can't be stopped from making a device work better after market(ing) missing features. 

With mobile it comes the dilution, disinformation most likely distraction and isolation which is not very helpful when you have to drive for instance or continue in routines that can only be built around being 'under served', so mobile devices can be made to be more smarter by syncing gestures and routines as part of user profiles not just ambient noise, these devices are initially time savers until they run into a specific challenge that users are expected to perform.
It is better to sell the user one product with most product features as you see in car radios that are more likely to distract the user especially when a car radio is a "smart device", how many manuals do these smart devices get, when was the last time you got a smart or mobile device with a user manual unless you check or ask, especially if you demand it? From that description you don't need to be sitting at the patent office or any standards body to understand that people still have more access to some form radio than tv or a mobile that can be actively considered to doing something useful to them.
Some chassis in some devices are practically empty vessels very good at having the cheapest(trendiest) available bits just everyone else is having them but with everything looking like something else, there will be more waste. So this a design motivation to avoid having 'the nothing', people litter because they see other doing it so fir network effects people easily drink the milk as long as it's good at the time, 

    - you don't need a 4G or 5G connection to run a certain app in the middle of nowhere,
    - likewise you don't need to stack so many applications, boxes or cables to do the things you used to do in the 80s, 90s, 00s, especially now!
 
Even for commercial of the shelf applications in towers, data centers and network centers for large operations, incoming 5G iterations, 6G, 7G and so on are only telecommunications standards not broadcast standards for cell towers. When push comes to shove every one can't be connected to the same server, not just yet. The blockchain can scale content/server infrastructure on demand to share it appropriately but that's beyond the scope of most design briefs but it is possible to share many more devices than on typical client(dependent app/browser) server(dinosaur) scenarios were it can be bull fight rodeo on what's the master or slave device, something users don't have to worry about in forward looking setups. Failure also has a network effect, when people imitate it and the network has to carry it because they don't have to think about how many packets are dropped or whether they are using IPv6, self healing software defined networking stacks that can see beyond the edge of the network spectrum.

Software Defined Hardware - SDH (CPU/GPU)

DARPA SDH Topic https://www.darpa.mil/program/software-defined-hardware
"a platform for learning and experimenting with system-level design issues" Understanding reconfigurable CPU Architecture with a Spectrum Z80 8 Bit Processor https://spectrum.ieee.org/dual-6502-z80-programmable-architecture
Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HOTOS '23: Proceedings of the 19th Workshop) https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3593856.3595894
Intel Software Defined Silicon(Si) https://github.com/intel/intel-sdsi
Software Defined CPU https://hackaday.com/2021/07/19/software-defined-cpu/
Software-Defined GPU-CPU Empowered Efficient Wireless Federated Learning With Embedding Communication Coding for Beyond 5G https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10100949
Software Defined Hardware Architectures https://semiengineering.com/software-defined-hardware-architectures/

People expect things to happen because they can just generate content but it's only just content, there's the physical reality that every device is a electronics gadget with some software and you can only go so far with generalisations with the latest abbreviation or the ones that have been floating around for years because there's the content in the physical world that still needs a lot of work, robots are not going to magically appear with all the work done, in other words, most ideas are stuck on storage and data centers especially dead leaves called pages on books rather than just shortened acronyms in confusion or theories - so you can see code as the last resort of a finished piece of work, it has to have a software as a service(design) from a set of tools a system integrator has at their fingertips, software defined services still require a lot of code, it's always better to skip it as long as there's dedicated hardware with software neatly hidden from sight with only service visible.
The blockchain isn't solving hard physical problems but it can given the right minds and compute power over a period of time, because it's solving other problems such as the sharing economy on mobile at scale starting somewhere.
The sharing economy for incoming data in the next generation internet on the blockchain is new territory this is a usecase for that can be scaled to spectrum efficiency applications in existing operations for evolving networks(follow #ITUData on socials), 
Whitepaper "World Mobile Chain: A blockchain based solution to empower a sharing economy for telecommunications infrastructure" World Mobile Token Ltd. Research Lab. https://worldmobiletoken.com/WhitePaper.pdf 
D. Burkhardt. (2018) Distributed ledger. [Online]. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8436299 
N. Szabo. (1996) Smart contracts: Building blocks for digital markets. https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/smart_contracts_2.html
Recent "Crypto" Related Whitepapers https://whitepaper.io/
The Internet Computer, Blockchain's cloud computer https://internetcomputer.org/how-it-works
What is the hyperledger (from 2015)https://www.hyperledger.org/about 
What is Hyperledger Fabric? https://www.ibm.com/topics/hyperledger
Blockchain https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain 
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
